Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Did you know that there is a Texas A&M University Veterans Association?
Well, the problem is that most of you don't know that.
and their aim is to change all that.
And one big step in that recognition process happened Saturday, October 30th at Kyle Field, halftime at the A&M versus Iowa State football game.
64 current students at Texas A&M were saluted by more than 86,000 fans, including former president and World War II veteran George Bush, for their service in the war on terror.
Current students who have served in Iraq or Afghanistan, it was a remarkable ceremony.
that was pulled together with the help and the planning of the Office of Veterans Services at A&M and the Texas A&M Veterans Association.
Their president is Mike Jarvis, U.S.
Army veteran of service in Germany and Bosnia in the mid 90s.
Mike, you kind of started off in the Army a little bit early, 17 years old.
You were in the state of Washington.
You were in high school, 93 it was, and decided to get into the Army.
Talk about that decision.
That's correct.
My uncle was an Army recruiter.
for the reserves, and we decided that the best way for me to be successful was to enter the Army early, and so I made that decision and I entered boot camp between my junior and senior year of high school.
And boot camp didn't scare you off.
You came back, I believe you finished school, and then you didn't go reserves, you went into active duty, is that right?
Correct.
I wasn't happy in the reserves.
I wanted to enter the active status and change my job, and I decided that combat engineering was for me,
It looked exciting.
And that's what you did.
That's what I did.
You became a combat engineer.
We'll clean it up a little bit, but your motto was you built stuff and then you blew stuff up.
That is correct.
Definitely trained in the art of explosives and TNT, C4, and also construction.
Right.
Went to Fort Hood.
You met a lady who would become your wife then.
And you were there for about 18 months, I know.
And then you were deployed to Germany.
You went to Bamberg, Germany.
And from there, you were deployed to Bosnia in 1996.
It's a pretty hazardous duty there.
Talk about your service in Germany and then in Bosnia.
Right away as I entered Germany, the conflict in Bosnia was going on.
And US forces were sent there basically as a peacekeeping mission.
And our unit, our engineering unit, was charged with the task of disarming many of the mines that you
heard about over here.
You know there were millions of them and we basically spent a year over in Bosnia cleaning that up and I left I believe in in January of 1996 and we didn't return till November so it was a long tour and I don't want to leave that because I mean that was obviously pretty dangerous work just by the sound of it.
I mean you were you were in situations that could have been quite hairy for you and quite damaging for you.
And I believe you told me also that you sort of helped in the design of vehicles or robots that would do that stuff instead of human beings, right?
That is correct.
As you can imagine, the disarmament of mines is a very dangerous job.
You have to be well trained, but that doesn't always mean you're going to be safe.
And so what we did over there, having so much time disarming these mines,
we created equipment that was remote control and robots and stuff like that where they could do the job for us.
And so that alleviated some of our manpower.
It was actually on the ground searching for mines.
We could actually employ 60 ton tanks or small little robots to go out and find the mines and disarm them.
And remarkably, you had no casualties in your unit.
The 16th engineers that became the 54th engineers, and you had no casualties, so you were obviously pretty good at your job.
I'd like to think so.
Because you're here to tell us about it.
Correct.
You left Germany in December of 98, and you actually got out.
The timing was something you told me.
It was just a few days before 9-11, is that right?
Timing was remarkable.
After my tour in Germany, I went to Fort Carson, Colorado, finished up my last couple of years of my enlistment,
and decided I was gonna go to college.
Well, when I got out, I got out August 30th of 2001, and on my way from Colorado down here to Texas, it was when?
9-11 happened.
So how'd you get to Texas A&M?
I know your wife was a Texan and that had something to do with it, right?
Correct.
My wife and I, we've been married 10 years now.
Her family's from Fort Worth, and we made the decision that we wanted to be close to her family.
when we had kids and we got two beautiful girls and they get a chance to be around their grandparents and Texas A&M was a perfect fit for me.
I was interested in an engineering degree and it's one of the best in the nation so.
And that's what you're currently actually enrolled in school.
Correct.
Going for your degree in agricultural engineering.
That is correct.
That's correct.
I'm an agricultural engineering student.
What are you gonna do with that?
That's a good question.
I'm gearing it towards natural resources, water resources in that area.
We'll work on that when we get there.
Let's talk about the Texas A&M Veterans Association.
It was actually started 10 years ago, but it's gone through some rough times, recognition times.
You even told me that a couple of years, it almost dissolved, as a matter of fact.
But you got interested in it, you and some of your buddies, and sort of breathed new life into it.
Talk about the association and sort of what it does and what its goals are.
Okay.
Our association was founded 10 years ago.
We just had our 10-year reunion.
Like you said, we had some rough years, and those rough years were recently.
our membership had dropped to real low numbers.
Working in the Veterans Services office, a group of guys there, we decided that the organization had a lot of potential and we wanted to carry it
on our backs and so we got involved with it with the officers and the group of people that were carrying it with such low numbers and like you said, breathed new life into it and this year we flourished and our motto this year is to get our name out and let people know who we are
what we're doing.
And our mission is, we're a community service oriented organization.
We wanna get out there and work with the community, but we're also a social organization.
That's very important to us.
but also we're the voice of the veterans on campus.
Exactly.
And so we're using that to the best of our abilities.
And that's a very important thing.
I know that you told me the other day when we were visiting that this organization, one reason it was created is there was a need for an organization to address who you all are, more mature students, students that have
been around the world, literally, and seen things that the normal just incoming freshmen wouldn't have seen, people that for the large part are married, maybe even have families.
And this was a group that for you all to hang with, and that was one of the reasons that the organization was formed.
And you keep sort of thriving on that type of identity, right?
Correct.
That was one of the biggest interests that I had in the organization is that I could
I could meet up with former service members, whether I was former Army, whether they were Marine Corps, Air Force, Navy, they'd all been deployed, they'd all served, and we had common ground there to work with, and we're quite different from the traditional student, the 18, 19-year-old student coming out of high school, so to have that common ground is
is rewarding.
Now as a student, I know you spend a couple of hours a day, even more I'm sure on some days, working over at the Veteran Services Office.
This is a different organization.
The university gives you space over in the pavilion building.
Talk a little bit about what that office does.
I know it's very important what you do for veterans, especially those that are deployed and coming back to Texas A&M.
Talk more about what they do.
The Veterans Service Office is a real pivotal
point for Texas A&M veterans.
What we do in that office, we hand out educational benefits for former service members, also active service members who are here getting their education.
But what we do in that office, one, it's a safe haven for military veterans.
When they come to Texas A&M University, a lot of them just don't know where to go, they don't know
who to talk to, and if they look us up in the phone book or online, and they see that, they can give us a call, and we can help them out with anything that they have in the university.
Yeah, I look at it as almost like a USO on Texas A&M.
Kind of like that, exactly.
Just a place to go.
You go around airports and you see USOs, veterans will go in there to talk to other veterans, and this is kind of the service you provide.
One very important thing that I know that you were very involved in this past summer was a way to reorganize or redo the way
that veterans that are deployed reaccess college after they have already served.
It was a problem before, it's not a problem now, and you all had a lot to do with that.
I want you to talk specifically about what happened and how that went about.
We saw that there was a problem on campus.
I believe the battalion even ran a story
on actually one of the Purple Heart recipients this weekend, Joe Gonzalez, had a problem re-entering Texas A&M after he was deployed.
So what was happening was as a student deployed, they had to withdraw from the university, then go overseas, do their service, but when they came back,
they were withdrawn and they had to actually go through the whole reapplication process.
Some of them were required to pay the reapplication fee.
Some of them, their residential status changed.
It was a mess and we saw the need to fix that and we got with university officials and they agreed with the problem and it was actually fixed immediately.
Dr. Mark Weichold was real pivotal in that and real supportive with that.
So now when a student is deployed, their contact point is you.
When they're leaving, they go to you, they find out what they can expect when they get back.
They go off, they serve, they come back.
Immediately they come to your office and you kind of help cut through the red tape.
You're a little bit of an advocate for them in getting right back into school and not having to jump a lot of hurdles, right?
That's correct.
The whole process is streamlined.
When a veteran leaves,
the last person that they're going to talk with is us.
And when they come back, the first person they're going to talk to is us again.
And the whole process is extremely beneficial to the veterans now.
We're going to talk a lot more about the Veterans Association and about the Veterans Services Office at Texas A&M.
But you heard us refer to what happened the weekend of October the 30th at Texas A&M.
If you were one of the 86,000 that were at the game, you saw it, the salute to the veterans.
And these were veterans that are currently receiving educational services from Texas A&M who have already served in either Iraq or Afghanistan.
I want to start off with a video that all of you saw that were at the football game.
If you were there, you probably want to see it again.
If you weren't there, you need to see it.
This was a video, by the way, that was supplied by the Association of Former Students, and I want to say that it was edited by Sean Iyer, class of 95, a veteran of Desert Storm.
Sean did a great job in editing this video, and we want to go to it right now, and it starts with University President Dr. Robert Gates and his welcome.
Here it is.
Howdy.
I'm Robert Gates, President of Texas A&M University.
I'd like to welcome you to Kyle Field as we pay special tribute to the United States military, including the thousands of Aggies who have long and distinguished records of service to our country.
Their acts of heroism in times of crisis is well noted and goes to the heart of what being an Aggie is all about.
Today, we honor the fine men and women who represent the Aggie spirit in the ongoing mission of Operation Enduring Freedom.
As we all know, freedom doesn't come without sacrifice, and six Aggies have paid the ultimate price in Operation Iraqi Freedom.
Today, we honor the memory of those lost and the service of those who are still in harm's way around the world.
A special thanks goes to all Aggie fans and to former students who have generously donated their tickets so that our service men and women might have the opportunity to enjoy one of the great aspects of Texas A&M, Aggie football.
We will have a special halftime program today, which will close with an invitation to you to join in singing of God Bless America.
We begin this tribute with a collection of photos sent to us by Aggies around the world who are on the front lines in service to our country.
Thank you and Gig'em.
Well, if you ask me where I come from Here's what I tell everyone I was born by God's dear grace In an extraordinary place Where the stars and stripes And the eagle flies
It's a big old land with countless dreams.
And happiness ain't out of reach.
Hard work pays off the way it should.
Yeah, I've seen enough to know that we've got it good.
Where the stars and stripes and the eagle flies.
There's a lady that stands in a harbor for what we believe.
And there's a bell that still echoes the price that it costs to be free.
No, it ain't the only place on earth, but it's the only place that I prefer.
To love my wife and raise my kids.
Pay the same way that my daddy did.
With stars and stripes.
I want to thank Texas A&M Athletic Department and also thank Andy Richardson over at the A&M Photo Lab Department for supplying us with that video.
And the Association of Former Students would like to tell everybody, all fans, everybody, all Aggies out there, that you can send your own online message to our troops by going onto their website, which is aggenetwork.com.
Anyway, I want to thank...
them for supplying us with that.
It was a great weekend.
It really was.
And it didn't come together easily.
I know you all had a lot to do with getting those 64 veterans there on the field.
And of course, former President George Bush, it was just a tremendous afternoon.
And you just had to be beaming because of the part that your association had to do with that.
It was a tremendous success.
Had a lot of
players in it.
Mike McKenzie over the athletic department asked me if I could somehow put together this group of 65, which ended up being 64.
And at the veteran service office, you know, a little over a week's worth of time, we came up with 64 confirmations.
Actually, there was more.
We just could not get everybody out there.
Indeed.
Unfortunately.
It was really tremendous.
And everybody that was on that field are students that are receiving educational services from Texas A&M right now who served in Iraq or Afghanistan.
And you told me that in all veterans that are receiving educational services right now, number over 300 now.
That's correct.
The numbers in the higher end of the 300s, we actually have over 400 students
who somehow, some way have put on an application that they had military service or were currently serving.
So there's quite a few veterans here on campus.
Indeed.
You took a lot of pictures from that day, and you took something like over 200 pictures that you showed me, and we were able to come up with a dozen or so.
We want to go to those right now and let Mike Jarvis sort of talk about each of the pictures that we've chosen to put on.
There, of course, is former President Bush and one of your compadres next to him.
That's correct.
Right next to him is Nick Lutton.
He's the vice president of the association and also a veteran service employee.
He served in Afghanistan and he actually helped raise the spirit flag.
Great picture.
That's how you just told the president a pretty funny joke.
There you are.
That's me with the F-18 pilots flying over.
I'm sure most of the viewers or the people in the stands notice how low they flew the first flyby.
There was, of course, two flybys.
There's some of the folks that raised the flag.
The fellow in front is Captain Tyson Vocal, two tours of Iraq, and viewers of Veterans of the Valley may recognize him.
He was on just a couple of weeks ago as our guest on Veterans of the Valley.
There you are.
That's me down on the field trying to get everybody lined up and ready to go.
Everybody's having just a wonderful time and
That phone was going 100 miles an hour.
They were having fun.
You were trying to organize them all.
I had a great time, though.
Former president went down the line and shook hands with every one of them.
That's correct.
Right there is one of the Purple Heart.
Actually, I believe that's both of the Purple Heart recipients.
The one saluting President Bush is Mark McCain.
His Bradley fighting vehicle was struck by a rocket propelled grenade.
He actually lost his arm and received a Bronze Star and Purple Heart.
And right next to him is the second Purple Heart recipient, Joe Gonzalez.
These guys right here are Marine Corps active duty members.
We call them short MESEP guys.
They're all active duty and they're very pumped up that they got to meet President Bush.
A lot of pictures of Mr. Luton and the president there.
There's the president pinning the Purple Heart on one of the Purple Heart recipients.
Crowd went absolutely nuts.
I think that everybody felt pretty patriotic that day.
And there's Dr. Gates and General Lord on the right side.
I believe he's Air Force Base Command four-star general.
And there's the flyby.
You can look up there and see that was loud.
I believe that was the second flyover because the first flyover was a lot lower.
Indeed it was.
That was a great day for you.
Sort of after it was all over, what was some of the feedback that you got from everybody?
I guess everybody was just obviously more pumped about that than they ended up being about the football game, unfortunately.
But they were very excited about that ceremony.
They were very excited.
The phone was ringing off the hook.
From the time the ceremony ended, in fact, we're still receiving calls.
We've got guys coming up to our office, checking out the pictures, and we're providing them with photos.
And I think it's going to last a little while.
I think the former president was very moved by it also.
I mean, he does ceremonies all the time in his retirement, but I think that this one really got him.
He seemed to be really enjoying himself and being very proud.
It really did.
Penrod Thornton is his liaison for A&M.
He works over at the Bush School.
And he told me that President Bush was really interested in receiving as much information on the two Purple Heart recipients as he could.
He was really excited to do this.
After he pinned the Purple Heart and Bronze Stars on, he wanted to meet the family members, which he did.
They were pretty excited.
I bet they were.
Texas A&M Veterans Association, you say that you've grown.
You've grown to 25 or 30 members.
You obviously want to grow even more.
There's a veteran out there.
If there's one of those 300 veterans out there that now know that you exist, how do they get in touch with you?
How do they get involved?
If there's a veteran out there that wants to get in touch with us, they can call us at the Veterans Service Office at 845-8075, or they can also get online at tamuveterans.com.
TAMU.edu and that's our website and there's a forum and they can get on there and talk.
I know one of the things Mike Jarvis that you all want to do is become more involved in the community and getting out there and just letting the community know that you do exist and that you're there to help them and that you're proud to be part of the community.
That's part of what you want to do.
Exactly what we want to do.
Exactly, exactly.
Congratulations on what happened on that Saturday at Kyle Field.
It was truly magical and it was truly
a great service to the veterans.
And I know that they appreciated it and everybody appreciates the work that your organization did.
Thank you very much.
All right, keep going.
That's Mike Jarvis.
Thanks for visiting with us.
So now you know about the Texas A&M Veterans Association and the Office of Veteran Services.
Their passion is to serve well, those Aggies who have served us well.
And thanks to Mike Jarvis for his army service in Germany and Bosnia and to all veterans.
And thanks to our underwriter, First National Bank.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Please join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.